guys just because somebody appears on
the dr. Phil show claiming that she's
pregnant with the reincarnation of Jesus
Christ doesn't necessarily make it so
just because someone appears on dr. Phil
and claims that the rapper Eminem is her
biological father
doesn't make it necessarily so if you
describe yourself with the word skeptic
if you have a youtube channel and the
word skeptic is in the name of your
channel you're supposed to be one of the
people on the side that asks careful
methodological sound questions before
leaping to conclusions before believing
or assuming anything that reaches beyond
direct empirical experience and that's a
tradition that goes back to ancient Rome
and ancient Greece and each and author
called sexist and Perkis and there's
only one new one modern idea in the
philosophy one thing that was added to
this in the 20th century and that's the
concept of falsifiability
that was developed and prepared by the
philosopher the scientific method known
as call popper he did philosophy of
science what if you want to call it okay
what's the opposite of skepticism the
opposite of skepticism is dogmatism
skeptics should not really be
embarrassed to be wrong being wrong is
something that happens to human beings
you might really find it convincing when
you're on PewDiePie's channel watching
that video letting you know that a young
woman is pregnant with the next
incarnation of Jesus and her biological
father is mmm which would technically
mean that mmm is God fascinating
fascinating and shout out to PewDiePie
thank you for bringing me up to date
with this story thank you for poisoning
a slash and rich in my life and mind
with this completely trivial news story
through the doctor dr. Phil show
the opposite of skepticism is dogmatism
and it is dangerous dangerous in the
truest sense the word when you have
someone like the armored skeptic who
dogmatically propounds dogmatically
believes something as simple as the
claim that quote antidepressants sold a
chemical imbalance in the brain I'm
gonna now go to a long series of Clips
contrasting what armored skeptics says
to what some scientists and experts say
in the field but guys it wouldn't take a
genius to just read the fine print
that's now written on every bottle of
Prozac it wouldn't take a genius to do a
little bit of google searching and a
little bit of fact-checking and to
realize how genuinely contestable these
claims are and even if you don't come to
a conclusion to do that most basic thing
that skepticism requires skepticism
isn't about coming to conclusion
skepticism isn't about always being
right the skepticism isn't about never
being wrong being wrong as something
happens to human beings and it's part of
the scientific process skepticism is
about admitting to yourself when you do
not know the skeptics were the people
who back in ancient Greece back in
ancient Rome we're willing to say hey
some people think the world is flat some
people think the world is round like a
sphere actually one of the most popular
theories that the world was more shaped
like a drum or a segment of a column and
guess who the skeptics were in that
debate the skeptics were the people who
said there's evidence on all sides
there's conflicting theories and we
don't know yet today we do in 2018 you
can put the pieces together and figure
out the shape of the planet worth living
on but skeptics by definition were the
people who refused to take that step
into dogmatism into certainty about
something they did not know and shame on
you armoured skeptic
what you're doing here is more dangerous
to the people who are giving advice to
to the public at large then if you came
out and said hey
ten days of heavy drinking 10 days of
vodka is a great way to shake yourself
out of manic depression all right I'm
familiar with vodka I quit drinking
basically when I was still a teenager
I'm familiar with the effects of vodka
and you know what the side effects of
vodka aren't nearly so dangerous aren't
nearly so terrifying in the long-term as
what you're about to hear about
antidepressants and antipsychotics that
are now also used to treat depression
about classes of prescription drug that
in fact have been debunked since the
early 1980s a class of drugs that here
is being dogmatically glorified by
someone who calls himself a skeptic
who's stepping way outside this field of
expertise giving medical advice on a
subject giving pseudo-scientific medical
advice on a subject on which really he
ought to have the maturity and
attachment to say hey there are some
things we're not the earth is flat
whether on M&M as is your father that
maybe this guy just doesn't know - yin
antidepressants are designed to help you
regulate your brain chemistry the
opposite of depression is not happiness
the opposite of depression is balanced
brain chemistry has anyone ever told you
that you had a biochemical imbalance did
you go to the doctor feeling anxious or
stressed or depressed and have them say
oh yes genetic it's biochemical you need
a psychiatric drug well you might be
surprised to learn that the only
biochemical imbalances in the brains of
people who see psychiatrists are the
ones put in there by the psychiatrists
we don't have any evidence that any
routine psychiatric problem from anxiety
to depression and even schizophrenia has
anything to do with a biochemical
imbalance so where did an idea like that
come from the first drugs that were
thought of as antidepressants were
actually similar they were drugs that
were used to treat TB and they were
similar to stimulants they were they had
similar effects to amphetamines and the
first articles about them make that
quite clear they described how they
could make people psychotic and very
agitated
and prevent them sleeping but then they
start to be described as antidepressants
they start to be portrayed as as
specifically attacking mood or
depressive symptoms there's even less
evidence for the serotonin or mono
Amiens theory of depression which you've
probably heard of and it's now widely
acknowledged by experts that there
really is no evidence that there are any
serotonin abnormalities in people with
depression even though that idea was so
widely promoted in the 90s particularly
when the SSRIs were being marketed brain
chemistry is the key to depression but
the brain is really complex a treatment
that may work for one person will not
work at all for another or maybe even
have the opposite effect
everyone's brain processes those
chemicals differently psychiatric drugs
are psychoactive substances and this is
sometimes forgotten so that's this is
just why I'm putting this this slide up
there is no fundamental difference
between them and other psychoactive
substances the ones were familiar with
of course are the substances that are
used recreationally the difference might
be that most psychiatric drugs produce
states that are not particularly
pleasant but that doesn't mean that
they're that they're fundamentally
different in any way they still like all
drugs alter the body and like all
psychoactive drugs because they work on
the brain they they produce altered
mental states as well and like all drugs
they produce tolerance that is the
effects that they have initially don't
necessarily last because the body adapts
to their presence and for the same
reasons you get withdrawal symptoms when
they're stopped some people need a lot
to feel stimulated others are extremely
sensitive to even the smallest imbalance
like other psychoactive substances the
states that they produce means that
people are not necessarily very good at
judging how they're how they're
functioning when they're under the
influence of the drug what someone
called Peter Breggin an American
psychiatrist has called a process of
spellbinding federal drug administration
is taking a hard look at the evidence
the FDA now wants the makers of paxil
prozac Zoloft and others to mention
suicide as a side effect on warning
labels and doctors have been ordered to
closely monitor patients
I mean it's ironic when you think about
it isn't it that a drug that's marketed
as an antidepressant has a side effect
of suicide to take the irony further now
the FDA's new label warnings and the
Canadian we'd like my books for 10 years
ago that these drugs produce anxiety
insomnia over stimulation impulsivity
aggressivity hostility and Oh general
worsening of their condition
antidepressants are designed to help you
regulate your brain chemistry allowing
you to function without the distraction
of emotional instability yes some drugs
will make you feel kind of dull but
that's the trade-off you take they seem
to fall in they seem to have two sorts
of contrasting effects the modern
antidepressants anyway the SSRIs and and
various other more recently marketed
antidepressants they seem to induce a
state of lethargy and listlessness and
drowsiness but at the same time seem to
make some people at least rather
agitated and panicky and tense and
irritable I should say actually that
they're much milder psychoactive
substances than many of the other drugs
that are used and prescribed for mental
health problems so in many people they
don't have many effects at all and I
think if we were talking to people
honestly we'd present antidepressants in
a very different way from the way that
they are currently presented so the way
they are currently presented by many by
many doctors and by drug companies is
this idea that they will help to
normalize an underlying chemical
imbalance or at the very least there's
that there's a hint or an implication
that they will normalize whatever is
going on that's causing the depression
if if we were taking a drug centered
approach this is what I think we would
say to people okay this drug effect the
way people think and feel but we don't
really know how yet because we haven't
studied it enough it may dampen down a
mo
suppress your libido we know it does
that may make you feel a bit lethargic
and drowsy and some people that may some
people it might make them feel a bit
agitated do you think that would be
helpful the opposite of depression is
not happiness the opposite of depression
is balanced brain chemistry we don't
have any evidence that any routine
psychiatric problem from anxiety to
depression and even schizophrenia has
anything to do with a biochemical
imbalance so where did an idea like that
come from we know the answer it was
actually made up by the brilliant minds
that the drug company Eli Lilly but then
in the 1980s there was a crisis over the
widespread use of benzodiazepines and
the idea of using mind-altering
substances to shut people up keep people
quiet stop people complaining got a very
bad reputation rightly of course and so
with david Healy's very cleverly shown
they started to change the market for
the benzodiazepines into a market for
antidepressants and they needed to get
away from that bad reputation they
needed to portray the antidepressants as
something that were avert we're
reversing an underlying disease so that
disease center model became very
important to them in the early 1990s and
then more recently of course we've seen
the creation of other conditions or the
chain a chain the changing nature of
other conditions like bipolar disorder
to sell new drugs so this is what I was
saying about antidepressants so the idea
that there was an underlying deficiency
or disease was sold in a package with
the drugs they very much came together
the idea that you had a chemical
imbalance and therefore you needed an
antidepressant in the 1990s with the
marketing of the SSRIs like prozac and
Eli Lilly were one of the funders of a
big campaign in the UK and I know
they've been campaigns here and
campaigns in Australia very that is
campaigns designed to increase the use
of antidepressants by increasing the
number of people who are diagnosed with
the depression so this campaign
suggested that 5% of the general
population had depression ten percent of
people attending general practitioners
it was it emphasized that
antidepressants are not addictive which
has transpired is completely wrong and
is now accepted as completely wrong and
it emphasized that they should be given
for for a few months and not just used
for a brief period it was very
successful we've already seen how much
the prescribing of antidepressants has
increased we all have to play an active
role in our battle with depression you
can't just pop a pill and expect your
problems to go away just because you've
managed to overcome some of the symptoms
of depression doesn't mean that you no
longer have depression and what they've
been doing is trying to persuade people
they've the makers of antipsychotics and
the antipsychotics are the big
blockbusters at the moment the new
antipsychotics like zyprexa and seroquel
they've been trying to get into the
depression market because they know that
there's many more people you know out
there with depression than with
psychosis and the way that they've been
doing this in part anyway is through
this diagnosis of bipolar disorder so a
lot of their advertisements have been
about trying to persuade people who
might view themselves as being depressed
that actually they've got bipolar and
therefore they they need an
anti-psychotic the advertising and
promotion has been very emotive and a
lot of it has been justified by this
idea that psychosis psychotic symptoms
are toxic to the brain so they have to
be stopped at the earliest point
possible you need to prescribe as early
as possible it turns out that it's
probably the antipsychotics that are
toxic to the brain that all the evidence
that people saw that brains that the
brains of people with schizophrenia and
psychosis were getting slightly smaller
over the first few months of their
treatment it looks as if that's
attributable to their drug treatment
rather than the disorder so in
particular I've got a macaque monkey up
here because the middle
middle line refers to a study well sorry
should say first Jeffrey Lieberman who's
a psychiatrist based in America
conducted a trial which was sponsored by
Eli Lilly which compared haloperidol and
olanzapine and brain scanned people for
over a year for a year followed them up
for a year and found that within 12
weeks there was evidence of shrinkage in
people taking haloperidol and over a
year there was evidence of the same
shrinkage in people on olanzapine as
well but to a slightly lesser degree
they concluded that what this showed was
that a lanza pain prevented the
underlying brain shrinkage better than
haloperidol and and they were obviously
convinced about this conclusion because
Eli Lilly then funded this study with
macaque monkeys which did the same thing
compared haloperidol
olanzapine and monkeys that were treated
with without any drugs and showed
conclusively that the brains of these
monkeys were smaller in the monkeys
treated with olanzapine and haloperidol
than the monkeys treated without the
drugs they were given some placebo
injections instead so and then this has
been a long-term follow-up study done
here as well which also suggests that
there was a strong correlation between
the shrinkage of the brain and the
amount of antipsychotics that people
were prescribed this trend this trend
started to label children with PD what
was called pediatric bipolar disorder
going back a couple of decades it wasn't
believed that children could have
bipolar disorder whose thought to be
something that only started later in
life but then there was this idea that
pediatric bipolar disorder can be
manifested in different ways from adult
bipolar disorder and this group at
Harvard started to do trials with with
children some preschool children testing
them with antipsychotics diagnosing them
with bipolar disorder it turned out they
were receiving enormous amounts of money
from the pharmaceutical industry which
they hadn't declared
it is not yet clear if antidepressants
do trigger suicide attempts but there is
definitely enough concern for the FDA to
issue this warning and until it gets
answers 10 drug makers must change their
warning labels and those taking the
drugs will be monitored this is hard for
me because I tried to commit suicide in
front of my five children I didn't know
what I was doing I don't remember
exactly what happened all I know is that
my hug has been took the gun away from
me and my children was looking from the
other room if my husband wasn't there I
wouldn't be here my children wouldn't
have a mother one woman earlier spoke of
near nearly committing suicide in front
of her children my sister did commit
suicide in front of Lindsay another
woman spoke of hollow-point bullets
that's what my sister used to do it my
sister would have never never killed
herself in front of this little girl she
would have never done that prozac
induced her to do that I attacked him
with a kitchen knife luckily he's bigger
and stronger than I am and he defended
himself but I did this right in front of
my son I thought I can't believe what
I'm doing I don't believe what I'm doing
this is wrong then I decided that I was
gonna kill myself the bottom line is I
was never suicidal before taking Prozac
I was obsessed with suicide while taking
Prozac and the obsession stopped
immediately after stop I stopped taking
Prozac
unfortunately with my dad we didn't have
time to notice too many changes except
that he became withdrawn and agitated
but that by that time it was too late he
got up and 9 o'clock in the morning took
a 12-inch butcher knife out of the
kitchen drawer and stabbed himself
violently in the abdomen once and then
proceeded to do it twice by the 14th day
I was experiencing such an intensified
fear that I could not stand to face life
as it was for me anymore there was to my
mind no hope and no future
where suicide had never been a logical
solution for any reason for me it now
became my only solution because I had
nothing left with which to fight and I
was terrified to go on living this drug
is most assuredly responsible for any
torment or suffering and the eventual
suicide of my husband I was totally out
of control
my friends were cast at my deteriorating
mental state or but were afraid to speak
to me about it because of my educated
state of mind during this time it is a
miracle I did not harm myself or others
I had become a menace to society and
that FDA is allowing this to happen I
want to know why how many more people
are going to be killed in Maine before
you do something you have the power to
change things
you have the power to listen to what we
say and investigate what we say we need
help and some say the FDA eventually
could ban the use of antidepressants
altogether 15 years ago I warned the FDA
and I warned the country and toxic
psychiatry that antidepressants were
causing a stimulant amphetamine-like
syndrome that was resulting in violence
and murder in 1994 and talking back to
prozac I warned the country in the FDA
again this time with tons now scientific
data on the same issues during that
period of time I was asked to be and
this is very relevant to deliberations
the scientific investigator for all of
the combined Prozac suits almost 200 of
them so I got to look at all the sealed
data that Eli Lilly Lilly didn't want
anybody else to see so about 20 books
later now and a few dozen scientific
studies and innumerable innumerable
product liability suits or I've looked
at sealed data I've come to tell you
that you're evaluating junk you're
evaluating carefully edited expurgated
data that I've seen and you haven't this
is a most remarkable circumstance
[Music]
- yen the very first thing you're gonna
find in the description below this video
is a link to a playlist of other videos
basically on exactly the same topic as
this one and just a few days ago I put
up a video much more brief succinct and
to the point
dealing with the rousing endorsement of
antidepressant drugs from skeptic
youtuber Jacqueline Glenn now now part
of the question of raised here in this
video is what does the word sceptic mean
anymore a lot of us need to go back and
re-examine our assumptions about bio
psychiatry and about antidepressants a
lot of us also need to go back and
re-examine our philosophical exceptions
our philosophical assumptions about the
meaning of skepticism the meaning of
Darwinism and then then how we apply
these concepts in our in our lives
there's not a lot of heroism really for
someone like Jaclyn Glenn or for someone
like armored skeptic to beat up on
Christianity in the decadent West in the
United States of America you know what
it takes guts it takes balls to stand up
to the Muslim establishment in Saudi
Arabia being an atheist being a voice
for atheist activism for skepticism in
that sense within the modern Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia that takes nerve being a
voice for Reform challenging the
institutions of Buddhism in Thailand
today takes nuts tape takes nerve takes
backbone there's risk involved if you
want equal rights for women within
Buddhism in Thailand if you want to
separate church and state
get the King disentangle the power of
the government from Buddhism stop having
Buddhist monks preaching government
policy and stop having government policy
being dictated upon any of these reforms
hey you might want to stand up for
actually theism skepticism what have you
within Buddhism - maybe all kinds of
things you want to do yeah it actually
does take nerve in some of these places
where the power of church and state have
not been disentangled where it's really
your skin on the line where you're
facing prison sentences
you're just facing the possibility of
being outright murder by religious
Fundamentalist and you know I think that
people like Jaclyn Glenn and an armored
skeptic they're they're kind of you know
they're wearing the skin of the lion
their fame on the internet came up they
had this aura of heroism because they
stood up and liberated themselves from
the chains of faith which is something
most of us did most of you go up watches
with sudden we did as children at such
an early age that we can barely remember
them and somebody I don't know if
there's a sense of which you can say
you're an atheist from birth but a lot
of us questioned or rejected
Christianity or Judaism at such an early
age that we don't really remember the
reasoning that went into it
nevertheless when other people go
through this infantile process of
intellectual development as teenagers or
as fully grown adults we seem to treat
them as heroes even when there is really
fundamentally nothing heroic about it
okay why because he evokes this idea of
speaking truth to power it evokes the
historical memory of Galileo standing up
and risking his life to say no he
believes that the Earth rotates around
the Sun and not vice versa that the Sun
rotates around the earth and being put
on trial by the Catholic Church the the
witch trials and all the barbarity of
the Dark Ages being challenged by the
supposedly noble man of science when you
look into the real biography of what
really happened with Galileo there's a
lot more moral complexity to it but
nevertheless that's the symbol that
someone like Galileo has become that's
the symbol someone like Copernicus has
begun again Copernicus is actually a
very different historical figure when
you look into what his life really was
and what the challenge to to you know
church authority was that he presented
and so on
nevertheless whether it's the the church
reformer of Martin Luther posting his
objections to the church or it's an
outright atheist or what or what have
you
these people appear to us wearing the
skin of a lion and examples that are
just slightly inconvenient for their
personal lifestyle choices whether it's
eating meat
drinking alcohol or getting high on
antidepressants we see that these are
heroes with feet of clay
they're not just phony YouTube
personalities they are phony skeptics if
you care about public health if you care
about the damage that is being done by
pseudoscience being popularized in the
internet you should hate these people
who themselves are Crusaders against who
designs if you hate dogmatism you should
hate these people who present themselves
as the enemies of dogmatism precisely
those who care most about skepticism in
a meaningful sense of the word ought to
be the most scandalized at the people
who today on YouTube on the level of
c-list celebrities have come to
represent skepticism and my heart goes
out to you because I'm a vegan and I
care about the future of the vegan
movement and one of the many reasons I
got on YouTube and started making videos
about veganism I've now made about 1,000
by the way and reached over 2 million
people Mayans blah blah blah blah blah
it's been a lot of effort is that I saw
exactly the people who were the most
popular most renowned voices for the
vegan movement dragging the name of
veganism through the mud nobody was
discrediting veganism more than
precisely the people who stepped forth
claiming to represent veganism and you
guys in the so-called skeptic community
or skeptic movement or new atheist
movement today you have to face out for
this fact that nobody is discrediting
skepticism more than your own
self-identified leaders baddest yen